Sir, join us for lunch downstairs.
Don't you get bored of eating alone?
Where are you guys going?
Don't tell me it's Geprek Spesial again.
Right? Your stomachs
and wallets must be suffering.
I've got my lunch.
Simple rations.
Packed lunch again? Are you a schoolboy?
No lunch money from your wife?
It keeps you healthy,
physically and financially.
Good nutrition, happy wife.
Healthy life, huh?
Wait.
New photo?
When did you go abroad?
I never see you take leave.
I made it myself, Bram.
Studio's expensive.
We have advanced tech.
France, London, Egypt.
Maybe it'll happen one day. Amen.
TONY SUKAHARTA, MANAGER
MONTHLY SALARY: 15 MILLION
FRUGAL SCORE: 85%
G-TECH IT SOLUTION
ONE SACHET PER PERSON
Lin?
Honey. The rent is due next week.
If we're late,
the landlord will bother Maya again.
Tony. Do you have a minute to talk?
Yes, sir.
We can talk as long as you want.
It's the same rate.
So we agree, sir?
Thirty-five, ma'am.
But it's different.
This is noon, not morning.
You can tell the freshness is different.
Hey.
I assure you
it'll still be fresh by this afternoon.
I've already dropped the price by 30%.
Thirty percent of one kilogram of mackerel
priced at Rp45,000 is Rp13,500.
Not Rp10,000.
This is basic math.
You shouldn't interrupt while I'm reading.
KENNY SUKAHARTA, A GENIUS
FRUGAL SCORE: 95%
Make it Rp20,000.
And I'll take some pomfret fish.
At that size, they just get stuck
between your teeth.
Pomfret fish are this size.
If you want bigger, get a dugong.
Rp30,000 is a good deal.
I've chased others off for less.
Okay, fine. Don't look at me like that.
Wait! I want a kilogram of clean cuts.
No bones, head, or guts. Just the meat.
Right as I was about to close too?
Use my scale.
Okay, fine!
LINDA SUKAHARTA, CEO OF THE HOUSEHOLD
FRUGAL LEVEL: MAX
-Thank you, sis! Bye-bye!
-Bye!
-Post it on your story, okay?
-Okay.
SALLY SUKAHARTA, FAMILY STAR
FRUGAL LEVEL: 80%
Want this? Only Rp10,000.
Nope.
BILLY SUKAHARTA, FAMILY BURDEN
FRUGAL LEVEL: 100% WASTEFUL
Who is this? I don't know any of them.
No soccer players?
Didn't you ask Mom for allowance?
No way. I got lectured for an hour
just asking for Rp2,000 yesterday.
Rp10,000?
I'd be in big trouble.
Bil, do you think the boys would buy
if I make it with soccer players?
Dunno. I don't know a thing about soccer.
What?
Then why did you ask?
That was the best.
Amazing.
-So good.
-It's like the meat bites back!
You ate all the cucumbers too.
-Too spicy. My tongue can't handle it.
-Try it again.
-Mr. Tony.
-What's wrong?
You good?
Sir.
Try something sweet.
You always drink coffee,
your aura is turning bitter too.
Have some snacks too.
Sir, were you speaking with the boss?
I heard they're cutting staff?
But Mr. Tony, of all people?
No way. He's a senior.
And he's in Finance, that's essential.
They're not cutting me.
Thank God.
I just had to choose,
take a pay cut or resign.
-I'd leave if I were you.
-Right.
All those years working here,
and they don't respect you.
It's not just me,
it's all of us.
-Oh, my God.
Seriously, those kids make
50 million rupiah a month?
And without the parents controlling it?
I could dance like that too, no problem.
It's hit-or-miss.
Depending on what's popular.
There's no guarantee.
What about our guarantee?
Picking up trash?
Saving up? Fasting?
The ones benefiting from that
are Mom and Dad, not us.
Then you should tell them.
She'll make me fast for a month.
Are you done with that?
Thanks.
What I'm saying is,
getting rich today is easy,
work smart, not hard.
How did you spot that?
Work smarter, sis.
Mom, the outlets are full.
Looks like you'll have to sacrifice
a few hundred watts
of electricity at home.
I'll take care of it.
Excuse me, Mrs. Linda.
There's a free lemon tester
at the supermarket. Remind me later.
Mrs. Linda, excuse me.
We're out of outlets.
Can I borrow another? Thanks.
Okay… Wait, ma'am…
Are you almost done?
The other kids are waiting.
-Come on now.
-She's taking so long.
JAKARTA PUBLIC LIBRARY
Mr. Martino.
When I look at the browser history,
the sites visited most often
are gambling, hacking,
and… porn.
I'm not accusing anyone,
but if something happens,
our district could be in trouble.
Everyone, go home! Leave!
JAKARTA PUBLIC LIBRARY
PLASTIC - METAL - GLASS
PRIDE LEADS TO POVERTY
FRUGALITY IS THE FOUNDATION OF FORTUNE
SRI MULYANI
I think you can try
cycling to work tomorrow.
My office is five kilometers
away from home.
It's doable by bike, why use a motorcycle?
Hang on. We've been through this already.
I know, but the motorcycle
has always drained our money.
So I'm the only one who has to suffer?
If we go through with the bike plan,
our expenses will be just 5,000 a month.
HEAT PATCH
10 SHEETS
Well?
Ken, come out. Let's have dinner.
Yes, Mom.
Come on.
It's refreshing.
Wait.
Why are you adding water?
So we have plenty.
Give it a try before you say anything.
Didn't you say you were feeling hot?
A statue, really? Like you could make one.
It's not that hard.
It's a subtractive approach.
I'm still visualizing it,
then it's just geometry
and finding the right medium.
Might as well make a pyramid,
like the pharaoh.
So fussy.
That's nice. I like it.
Hey.
One glass per person.
You only gave me half earlier.
I swear.
You can have more next time.
-Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
-Dad!
-Hi, Dad.
I read that physical touch is crucial
not just for a child's growth,
but also for the mental
and emotional health of the parents.
Thanks.
It's almost year-end.
Dad should be getting his bonus soon.
Let's plan a vacation.
Bali's getting old. Somewhere else?
Okay. Kenny, you choose.
Where do you wanna go?
Maybe we can revisit the route
of General Sudirman's guerrilla operation
alongside the Allied forces.
-I think Bali's fine.
-Yeah, let's do Bali.
We're going to Bali, right, honey?
Bali is too windy right now.
What?
I should go
and change.
Listen.
Please listen first.
-Okay.
-Hear me out.
I was shocked.
I'm… not ready.
To…
Okay, and?
I know I should've consulted you first.
Right? Basically,
for now, I accepted the pay cut.
But it's temporary. Okay?
If I… resign,
who knows when I'll get a new job?
It's better to be safe, right?
No, it's not like that.
How much is the pay cut?
What?!
Nah, never mind.
Eight million?
Rent is five million.
Three million for food.
Water, electricity, school fees, Internet,
community fees, trash, and transportation?
Forget about getting Kenny
into a top school.
What do we do if that's still
your pay next month?
And…
that's not all.
What were we thinking back then?
This…
This feels like
a sin.
I feel like I'm being punished.
But we meant well.
We should give Maya a call.
Let's talk here. My kids are asleep.
Sure. Let's stay here.
Lin.
I know this is sudden…
Yeah, we have unexpected news too.
It's an emergency.
Who's going first?
Listen…
Maya.
Can we push the rent payment
to next month?
But it's not that
we'll double it next month,
we'll still pay--
My husband is going through a tough time.
Gosh.
His salary was cut.
-I can't say anything.
-That's why
I called you. I wanted to tell you that.
Lin.
The landlord is trying
to marry off his daughter,
a spinster.
While he has a chance.
So he wanted to pay for the wedding.
That's why…
Yeah, go on.
He's asking you to pay rent
for the year.
Otherwise,
he'll rent it to someone else.
We can't.
May.
Look, take your time to think it over.
We have.
But if you can't pay
by the end of the month,
I won't be able to help anymore, sorry.
Well, then.
I remember how much
we struggled to find this house.
We almost felt like giving up.
But then
we found this diamond in the rough.
The building is good,
the environment is peaceful.
How did it perfectly fit
our budget back then?
I'll fix it tomorrow.
For what?
Come on, now.
We'll find a way.
Don't cry.
The kids will think we're fighting.
It's okay.
Dad wanted to tell you all something.
Listen to him.
I work hard for all of you.
There are moments when,
despite all the effort,
giving our all, sometimes it's just--
His salary was cut.
It's a huge cut.
His pay has been halved
from what it usually is.
Which means we can't
spend recklessly as before.
But we never spend recklessly.
We're like the most extreme
cheapskate family ever.
Why turn the fan up so high? Set it lower.
No need to have it at full speed.
It's wasting electricity
and could give you a cold.
Go take a shower. You'll feel better.
I've set aside the water.
It's being frugal.
Imagine there's a line between
being frugal and being cheap.
We're swinging right in the middle.
Dad.
I have some savings.
If needed, I'm fine
with getting a side job,
aside from selling K-pop merchandise.
No, Sal.
And one more thing.
Your mom and I have decided
that we should move out.
Billy, you're right.
We've been living frugally all this time.
And now,
let's try to cut back even more.
See?
It's happening.
We've ended up poor.
We were never rich.
What do you mean "ended up"?
Moving suddenly like this
is going to impact my mental health.
It'll be hard to focus on my studies.
So if my grades drop,
I hope you can understand.
I don't understand. What?
Life is like coffee.
-Coffee.
-If we don't learn to enjoy it,
all we'll taste is bitterness.
You know-it-all.
Have you even had coffee before?
I don't mind moving,
as long as I have my cupboard.
Whatever problems come our way,
if we face it as a family,
we'll overcome it.
We must.
Have faith.
-It's pouring hard.
-Right.
-Raincoat!
-I'm going to be late.
I'll go get it.
Oh, no.
We should take a taxi if we
want to make it on time in this rain.
I'll find us a cheaper place to live.
Probably smaller than this one,
but it's temporary.
Let's stay frugal, keep saving,
and work hard until we have enough
to move back into this house.
Honey, what do you think?
It's too far
above our budget.
Well?
It's too exposed.
Yeah, it's new.
The guy was smiling at me.
Really? Why not me?
Hold on.
Is this the right address?
It is.
The door is open. Maybe they're inside.
Be careful, honey.
Excuse me.
We're here to see the house.
Honey.
We need money to renovate this.
Is that a bedroom?
What was that?
I think it's too creepy.
I'm leaving.
BIRD HOUSE FOR RENT
ABOVE KONDANG INTERNET CAFÉ
KONDANG INTERNET CAFÉ
24 HOURS
Excuse me.
Can I help you?
Is it true there's space for rent here?
This one?
Oh, the one upstairs?
It's true. You wanna see?
-Yes.
-Okay. I'll take you.
I'm Tony.
-Rozak. Follow me.
-Thank you.
Wow. You have a ping-pong table?
-Right.
-You play often?
No. It belongs to Ali.
He passed away.
Rest in peace.
The house upstairs was Ali's too.
Are you a psychic? How did you know?
This is it.
Mom.
You set aside money
for our college, right?
Why not use that?
Billy might not need it,
and I can try for a scholarship.
We shouldn't use that carelessly.
Right, honey?
Those savings…
are to secure your future.
You ate three.
That was my share.
But no worries,
I've had enough calories today.
See? The owner's chill. Why are you upset?
Everyone gets some.
This is the house.
This?
Yes.
Isn't this a bird house?
Yeah, it is.
You sure we're moving here?
It's not about being sure.
It's about sacrifice.
Let's look inside.
The birds still live here.
Water's running.
It's so dirty.
Billy.
Look at the view.
Trains passing by.
It's fine.
As God Bless puts it,
the roof may be straw and the floor dirt,
but it's best to be here.
Our own home
You see?
You want to stay at the old house?
It'll only cover us for two months.
After that, we'd be homeless.
Peace be upon you!
-Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
Mr. Tony. This is Engkong.
He's the landlord.
Hello, Engkong.
I didn't expect humans would live here.
-I thought it's for--
-We'll take it, Engkong.
This is for a year.
-Gosh.
-Over there.
Don't take it from me.
The ceiling caved in just a moment ago.
How about a discount for the repairs?
Here.
Thank you.
If I knew you were moving in right away,
I'd invite the head of the neighborhood
to sort out the proof of address.
Well, I hope you all like it here.
Amen.
Well, see you, Mr. Tony.
-Thanks. Rozak.
-Thanks, Engkong.
-Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
Mom.
I found a cheap pickup truck rental
to help with the move.
What do you think?
No need for that, Sal.
What do you mean?
Easy.
NOT FOR SALE
Everyone! We have
special deals before we move.
-Come check it out!
-Hello!
Agus, I heard your wife
accidentally knocked over your TV?
Good timing.
We're selling our TV for cheap.
Here it is.
-It's in good condition, Billy.
-Of course.
-How much?
-Two million.
-Can't you go lower?
-How much do you want?
I have a million. How's that?
-Okay, fine. Deal.
-Great.
I sold the TV.
MOVING OUT SALE
ALL DISCOUNT
At half price.
I'm good at sales.
You just don't believe me.
Mom, this is from the sofa, dining table,
water dispenser, and washing machine.
The total is Rp2,563,000.
I've tried marking up the price--
This is plenty.
Look. I'll take all of this.
Good job, Billy.
But you have a lot to learn.
Sally, give him some tips.
I can't believe we've spent
15 years in this place.
Soon someone else will live here,
sleep in my room,
renovate the kitchen,
and erase all traces of us.
All the money in the world
can't buy our memories in this home.
To others, this house might be cheap,
but to me… it's priceless.
Don't be sad.
We'll come back to this house.
Right?
Amen.
Are we really that broke?
Even Mom pulled out
the money she invested.
We've always been frugal,
yet we're getting poorer
instead of richer.
Money doesn't define wealth.
It's about how you think.
Dad!
Please keep it steady. I'm trying to read.
Okay.
Sorry, Ken.
My legs needs spooring and balancing.
Billy!
Help dad out.
Watch out. Lower it.
Once everything's moved and settled,
we'll open this.
Everyone should have one each,
not one piece for five people.
It's a good thing
we have Billy's worn-out shirt.
I can taste the cheese.
Don't throw out the wrapper.
There was a wrapper?
Oh, my God, Billy!
You ate it?
Which one did you take?
Take out ten million from the 18 million
for emergency funds.
As for the eight million,
it's seed for our new savings.
Honey.
Is everything all right?
I failed, Lin.
I dragged you all
to live in a place like this.
It feels like
drifting in strong current…
trying to swim to shore,
but never reaching it.
It's tiring.
Must be exhausting.
You taught me and the kids
to be frugal, to live on a budget,
or whatever you want to call it.
Do you realize?
We've all gotten used to
living with more than enough.
Look at your friends.
Do any of them take their families
on vacation every year?
No, right?
But that was back then.
Look at how things are now.
It's just an unfortunate situation.
But it's my responsibility.
If we stay consistent
and keep living frugally,
I'm sure we won't be here for long.
I'm just grateful we have a place to stay.
When I think about it,
living here isn't too bad.
Climbing stairs all the time keeps us fit.
And…
it's peaceful up here.
Not so much noise like downstairs.
Right?
Good morning, Jakarta!
My chili's growing!
Please grow healthy.
Okay, everything's ready.
Here's yours.
This is Sally's.
I won't get smarter
if this is all I get to eat.
The serving is small,
but full of nutrition.
Please pay attention when I explain.
It's got everything. Carbs, protein,
vitamins, and minerals.
I say this every time.
Aren't you sick of hearing this by now?
You want to be smarter?
You need to study more, not eat more.
-Okay? Now go.
-You gave Sally pocket money?
As if.
She earned it herself,
I didn't give her anything.
-Just go.
-Playing favorites.
Playing favorites?
Mr. Tony.
-Hey!
-Isn't it tiring to ride a bike?
You'll get there faster
if you're on a motorcycle.
Besides, that bike is too modern for you.
You should get an older model.
See you later.
It gets a bit tiring,
but it's cheap and agile.
I'm running late.
I'm taking off.
See you later.
Mom! Please keep it down!
I need to concentrate, thank you!
Ken!
I just asked you to draw grapes.
What are you drawing now?
Sorry.
Mr. Tony.
We're all going through salary cuts,
we know it's hard.
But it makes us sadder
seeing you pretend to be excited.
The situation may be hard,
but we can still be optimistic, right?
Okay.
Given the limited water supply,
and rising prices,
I came up with an innovative solution.
It's called…
Poo-poo bottle.
As a bidet?
Everyone gets one liter of water a day
for their personal bidet.
Worried about foul play?
That's not possible, as each bottle
is secured with a lock.
How's my presentation, Tony?
Any questions?
A bit extreme, but…
I like it.
Now it's your turn.
-Okay, my turn.
-What's new at work?
So, because Mr. Dirga
was impressed by my speech
about being frugal during tough times…
Tough times produce strong people,
and strong people create a bright future.
The question is, are we strong enough
to get through this difficult time?
Our journey will be much harder
if we walk alone.
But if we walk together,
hand in hand, living frugally together,
not only can we overcome
these tough times,
but we will also grow
in quality as human beings.
This is the philosophy
I live by every day.
Because…
So I've been entrusted with coming up
with an efficiency program at work.
So cool.
If it's successful, I'll receive
a bonus that's
quite substantial.
Substantial?
So you still have your old job,
and you're also taking on this new one?
-Double job?
-Right.
But… it's not double the salary?
Just a bonus?
Did you say yes?
Yes.
Your boss is so cunning.
Wow.
Ouch.
What's the matter?
Gosh.
What's with him?
That's because of
all the spicy snacks you're eating.
Take a shower too.
DAD - MOM - SALLY - BILLY - KENNY
The water's out.
Use the water in the bottle.
I'm so dead.
This is really happening.
It's not enough.
Use some of mine.
Just pay me Rp3,000.
Hey!
-You a thief?
-No, sir.
-Admit it! You are!
-I'm not.
-Sir!
-What are you doing here?
I'm not a thief.
I'm looking for the homeowner.
This house is empty!
Sir, please wait.
Let me breathe. Calm down.
This is Mr. Tony's house, right?
Tony Sukaharta?
You know him?
Who are you?
I'm his relative.
The security guard.
Where's your energy?
-We're pumped.
Are you tired?
I know being frugal can be tough.
But when things get really tough,
I just look at this.
This is the key.
My trick book.
Do you know how powerful this book is?
We can
buy a TV.
A TV?
-Seriously?
-Yeah.
For real?
You're not messing with me, right?
The numbers don't lie. We can buy a TV.
Is it wise to buy a device
that dumbs people down?
It clearly clashes
with our plan to be frugal--
When are we buying it?
Want me to go buy it?
Sure.
Who's that?
Cipto!
Sis!
What happened to you?
What are you saying?
How are you? Where have you been?
UNCLE CIPTO, THE MOST FUN UNCLE
FRUGAL SCORE: 3%
How about it?
It's a bit dusty.
Here, I'll wipe it.
-No cracks?
-None.
Discount?
I don't think so.
There's a scratch. Still no discount?
This is just a typical wear-and-tear mark.
But I promise, the screen is scratch-free.
Forty-two inches.
Correct.
The warranty's active?
Just the store warranty applies.
What's that sound?
Well, you're shaking it.
It's loose here.
-It's loose.
-Really?
Mind if I open it?
I want to check the connection.
-You got a screwdriver?
-Okay, wait.
The plus screwdriver.
The plus.
Thanks.
This is the one.
Mom.
Shouldn't we keep the savings?
No, that's a reward for all of you.
Don't worry. This won't affect
our savings plan.
But listen up, everyone.
Make sure you all still study hard,
help us out around the house,
-and stick to living--
-Frugally.
Be frugal, Sal.
Billy, what are you doing?
Getting a drink for Uncle Cipto.
Don't worry about me, Billy.
I brought a tumbler.
Here it is, Billy.
This is no ordinary water.
My partners are wealthy people.
If you've ever been to
a fancy supermarket,
they sell glass bottles
of pure water, no filtration.
That's my partner, sis.
Can I have some? It's fancy water, right?
Very. Try it.
Do you have a job now?
Of course I do.
What kind of question is that?
I'm working on a project right now.
Not this fancy water,
it's a different one in retail.
Where do you live?
I'm sharing an apartment with my friends.
-Really?
-All good.
You're sharing or freeloading?
I'm sharing.
Chill, I've got money, okay?
And stop looking at me like that.
Like what?
Wait. Tony's calling.
-Honey.
-I might be late coming home.
Why?
I was gonna have the TV delivered
so I could hitch a ride
and save my legs from biking.
But the delivery cost was crazy.
And they charge extra if I tag along.
Okay, I get it.
Are you done?
-It's done.
-All good?
Yes.
-Which side is up?
-This side.
Hold on.
Help me.
There we are.
I'll be home before it gets dark.
All good to go. The remote, cables,
and the warranty booklet are inside.
Drive safely.
Take care and thank you.
-Thanks.
-You're welcome.
Are you having dinner here?
-Is that okay?
-Yeah.
Sounds good. I actually
just had lunch at a restaurant.
But you know how their portion
doesn't really fill me up.
Sure. But before dinner,
go take your niece
and nephews out for a walk.
A walk?
Go.
Guys, let's go for a walk.
I'm good, Uncle.
This book…
…has already taken me
to places far more interesting
than anywhere around here.
I assume you won't
take me anywhere far anyway.
He…
Is Kenny okay?
Just let him be.
-I think his head is--
-Just go.
Let's take a walk.
Take care.
I want this.
You don't wanna
look around first? Come on.
Ice cream?
I think it's going to rain, Sal.
If you catch a cold after,
your mom will scold me.
Let's get other snacks.
Plenty to choose from.
Fine, then.
How about this one?
T-teok-bo-kki.
Tteokbokki.
-Yeah, that.
-Let's get this, Uncle.
With a name like that,
it's probably not going to taste good.
Let's go.
You said I could choose,
but I can't have this or that.
It's not that you can't,
but what if they don't taste good?
It'd be a waste of money.
You sound just like Mom.
You've got more excuses than money.
This sucks.
KORSET
ROLLER SKATE COMMUNITY
Wait here. I have a fun idea.
I have a bad feeling.
Yeah.
I'm going home if he causes a scene.
Guys! I got you a skateboard!
You mean roller skates.
You have to feed him after this.
He must be starving.
Thanks.
Hang in there.
Stay strong. We're all praying for you.
-Cheer up, Billy!
-Cheer up!
-Cheer up.
Cheer up.
Seriously.
Get me roller skates
for my birthday, Uncle.
But how come everyone
was praying and rooting for me?
What did you tell them?
Can I borrow these for my nephew?
He's battling cancer
and only has three months to live.
He wants to try it once
before it's too late.
Let's go home. Maybe the TV has arrived.
How much blood did you give?
It felt like a gallon.
I should've asked for more porridge.
So stingy.
INDONESIAN RED CROSS
BLOOD DONATION UNIT
-Honey.
-Surprise!
You must be so tired.
You should've gone with Cipto.
-Gosh.
-You okay, Dad?
-Put it here.
-Yeah, let me through.
-It's pretty heavy.
-Let me help.
Where are Billy and Sally?
They went out with Cipto.
-Carefully.
-I got it. Kenny. Watch your foot.
-We have a TV.
-Finally.
Thank you, honey.
Nice, isn't it?
-Wait.
-Good thing it's home in one piece.
You okay?
-Oh, gosh.
-I'm okay.
-Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
-Dad!
-Our TV, Billy.
-Hey.
-Cipto.
Your skin is lighter.
On skincare?
You've gotten ragged.
Seriously?
Why are you trembling?
-It's a long story.
-Same here.
-New TV?
-Yeah.
In God's name.
Don't try to be cool.
Push the button.
"For your eye health,
this TV includes a proximity sensor."
"It only turns on when you're at
the recommended viewing distance."
-Move back, everyone.
-You should read it first.
Thanks, Ken.
Try now.
Ken, it still won't turn on.
How far should we be?
Five times the TV's diagonal length.
Stop, stop.
Ready?
Are you serious?
Did you bring the wrong one?
No, I tried this one and it worked.
We'll take care of it.
It usually works when women do it.
Five,
six,
seven.
It has to work now.
All that cycling with the TV was worth it!
Finally!
Where are you going after this?
I think I want to go see Mom.
It's been a while.
You never visit her. You don't love her?
Of course I love her.
Can you afford the transport?
I'm okay, sis.
But if you'd like to offer some…
Well,
I can only offer a bit.
Thanks for treating my kids.
Send my regards to mom.
I haven't been able to visit her,
it's tough times.
Mom loves you, you know.
Try not to fight with her.
Listen to what she says. She means well.
Get yourself a job.
You're young, don't waste time.
Fifteen thousand?
-Thanks.
-Yeah.
AGOES MEATBALL SOUP
Delicious.
Kids.
I forgot I can't have beef.
Do you want to buy a meatball
for Rp3,000 each?
After all, you can't buy
just a piece here.
-Sure.
-I'll take two.
Please do.
Go ahead.
-Take some.
-This is a good deal.
Can I buy the noodles too?
-Go ahead. Rp3,000 as well.
-Really? Okay.
I'm taking two.
Not bad.
-Thanks, Gramps.
-You're welcome.
-Sir, that makes it Rp18,000?
-Right.
Here. You can keep the change.
Gosh. Thank you.
You're welcome.
Rp5,000 profit.
The broth is filling enough.
GRANDPA HANZ, THE PROFESSOR OF FRUGALITY
FRUGAL SCORE: 101%
-Hello. Peace be upon you, Ton.
-And upon you peace, Dad.
I'm in Cirebon now.
Just got access to free Wi-Fi.
I left Semarang at dawn.
Why so sudden? Where are you going?
I'm going to your place
for my birthday this year.
It's cheaper if just one person went.
But make sure to pick me up, okay?
Yes, Dad. Of course.
Peace be upon you.
And upon you peace.
Wow.
Here's yours.
You should try this.
MARKET SHOPPING SERVICE
CHEAPER! HASSLE-FREE!
I made it myself.
-A tester?
-I'm hoping to sell this if it's good.
-Thanks.
-See you.
-Mrs. Rosi.
-Yes.
I asked for extra oranges.
The seller tried to trick me,
luckily I had a scale with me.
So I asked for extra.
Thanks, Mrs. Linda. Not just the shopping,
but for the extra stuff too.
-Pleasure's mine.
-Thank you.
-Order again soon.
-Will do. See you.
Okay. See you.
Hey!
The Wi-Fi works when the door's open!
Oh, please, Mrs. Linda.
Raking in cash, ma'am?
Zak, won't you extend the Wi-Fi range?
-What?
-One meatball soup.
This is so last minute!
-Kenny!
-What?
Grandpa Hanz is coming!
I knew it.
I was wondering,
we haven't talked about
going to Semarang for his birthday.
But I figured it's because
our current situation.
Okay, I'm ready.
Are you okay going alone?
There's some bok choy, but it's small.
Gosh.
Peace be upon you.
And upon you peace.
What is he carrying?
We should've gone shopping too.
Why did he wait until the last minute?
What should we cook?
Cabbage and salt.
What?
Grandpa used to say
just having those two is enough.
But we don't even have cabbage.
What are you doing, Ken?
It's Grandpa's birthday present.
Gosh, I forgot to buy a present.
I haven't made anything.
I can tell him this is from all of us.
-Really?
-Yeah.
Great, I'll help you.
What are we making?
It's okay. It's faster if I do it myself.
Veggies!
-Veggie cart!
-Right!
Mister!
Wait!
VEGGIE GUY VS LINDA
Chinese cabbage, Rp14,000 a kilogram.
Seven.
Rp14,000.
That's for two kilograms.
Fourteen for a kilogram.
Rp14,000 for two kilograms.
Two kilograms is Rp26,000.
That much would get me
three kilograms online.
Go buy online, then. It's different.
Online sellers don't push carts.
Fine!
How much bean sprouts would you like?
Ma'am! How much are bean sprouts online?
Hey.
-Finished printing? Let me see.
-Yes.
It's all good.
Print double-sided next time.
Remember, save paper, save nature…
Save the budget.
Exactly.
Please remove the water dispenser
-and bring a five-gallon jar.
-Yes, sir.
-Over here.
-Okay.
Sir.
Filling up your tumbler?
Open the lid first.
You've never used this before?
You spilled some.
Thirteen.
Why didn't Grandpa take the train?
It's faster and more comfortable.
At his age, he must be exhausted.
You know how he is.
If there were a horse-drawn carriage
from Semarang to Jakarta,
he'd definitely take it.
Just like Dad.
Frugality runs in the family.
If so, why are you wasteful?
Don't tell me…
There's no way I'm adopted.
You've seen Dad's childhood photos, right?
I look just like him,
unfortunately.
Honey, two kilograms
of Chinese cabbage go for Rp10,000.
Guess how much the delivery is? Rp20,000.
That's way too expensive.
Where's the shop?
Kalideres.
Okay, share the location. I'll pick it up.
Grandpa!
Sally, Billy!
It'd be a waste.
They're unopened.
CABBAGE FARMER
KALIDERES
Thank you.
-Honey. Cabbage.
-My Chinese cabbage!
Thanks, honey.
Take off your shoes and close the door.
Right.
I knew it.
Hey, hey…
Seriously, 1.8?
Honey, you didn't weigh it again?
We paid for two kilograms.
You can take 200 grams
from my portion.
That's not it. The seller scammed us.
Whatever.
-Peace be upon you.
-Look who's here.
-And upon you peace.
-Dad!
You're finally here. Come on in.
Yes, yes.
Dad.
-I'm tired.
-Tony!
What happened? You're sweating buckets.
I was working.
What do you do for work now?
Working hard.
Kenny.
Grandpa's here!
-Grandpa!
-Hi!
My grandson.
Good boy. How are you?
Did you miss me?
Before you came, I did.
Now I don't because you're here!
I guess so.
We all missed you.
Come on, help out so Grandpa can rest.
Take it easy, Dad.
Good thing Kenny reminded us
Grandpa likes cabbage.
You like it, Dad?
This is my favorite dish.
Tony.
I think you made the right decision.
A house doesn't need to be huge,
as long as it's comfortable. Right?
But we shouldn't let go of our dreams.
It's what keeps us motivated.
Believe that our efforts
will always pay off.
That's true.
What does that mean?
Right.
God willing,
by next year we'll have saved enough
to rent our old place.
That's it.
Stay motivated and have faith.
A house isn't just walls and a roof,
it's the memories it holds.
Happy birthday to you
Blow the candles.
They're at it again.
The anti-corruption commission
is currently…
THIS PROPERTY HAS BEEN SEIZED
-Sir, look this way!
-Sir!
Mister. Would you mind
photographing my family?
I don't have a family photo.
Our house is over there.
Over here, cameras ready!
Sure.
Ready?
Ready? One, two--
Billy, smile!
Wishing you long life
May you live long and be blessed
Live long and be blessed
Thank God.
In the name of God,
the most Gracious, Merciful.
Now, let's dig in!
-Yummy.
-Stay healthy, Dad.
Who made these?
It was a gift.
Sorry it's not much.
Let's just be grateful.
Attention, everyone.
This story is titled
The Ants of Sukaharta.
Inspired by Aesop's
The Ant and the Grasshopper.
It looks great.
The Sukaharta ants worked hard all summer,
while a grasshopper named Billy
spent his days running,
singing, and laughing without care.
That's Billy.
"Why bother working so hard?
You should enjoy life."
And when winter arrived,
sure enough,
Billy the grasshopper went hungry
because he had no food.
But guess what?
The ants didn't get mad.
Instead, they shared what they had,
not because they had plenty of food,
but because they knew that happiness
is not about how much we have,
but about how much we can give
and support each other during the storm.
Thank you.
And happy birthday, Grandpa Hanz.
That was great!
Your grandson is amazing, right?
When did you make that?
To tell you the truth,
there's someone interested
in renting the house.
But I'm holding it off for you.
But you need to pay
for the full year in two weeks.
I'll make sure you'll have the money
by the 1st of next month.
Thanks, Maya.
See? That's dangerous.
No matter how much we fix it,
this house just won't hold up.
Peace be upon you!
-And upon you peace.
Hi, guys. I brought Engkong here
to talk about the lease extension.
I don't even know what to say.
You can see the condition of the house.
We fixed it up multiple times.
But it keeps needing repair.
This will only benefit you.
The heck? You're the ones living here.
I'm not looking for profit.
It's fine if you don't want to
renew the lease.
Yeah, we're planning to move out.
Uh-oh.
Then let me know
once you've emptied it out.
I'll pass the lease to Haji Jaul
for his goat house…
I mean, bird house.
What is wrong with them?
Goodbye! Peace be upon you!
-And upon you peace.
Well, then…
We're moving out?
Do we have enough?
Your bonus should cover the difference.
I can chip in the rest
from my shopping service.
Love in hardship.
That's Grandpa's camera.
He sent it to get fixed,
but Kenny loves using it.
He's had a change of dreams.
He wants to become a photojournalist.
Let's see if he changes
his mind in a week.
So, I'm introducing an innovation,
glow-in-the-dark T-shirts.
Veterans and die-hard fans will receive
a headband, socks, and a scarf.
FAN PACKAGE - 200,000 RUPIAH
That's all from my presentation.
Thank you.
Totally amazing.
Acting like a real estate agent
for a T-shirt.
So extra.
It's called dedication.
Gosh!
-What do you think?
-I love it.
-Should we order now?
-Yeah.
Okay. Fifty pieces…
In two weeks.
Here's the contract, Sal.
Sign here.
PURCHASE AGREEMENT
-The down payment of 50%.
-Got it.
Sir, about my bonus
you promised back then,
when will I receive it?
Don't worry about it.
The bonus is definitely coming.
Thank you, sir.
However, I'll give you half of it first.
But I need cash right now.
I need it in full.
Is that so?
Yes. Can you do it?
Sure, why not.
But given the current situation…
I don't think I can keep you anymore.
What?
You only get half?
What now? We're moving in two weeks!
Didn't you think about that?
Lin, please talk to Maya again.
I've already given her a hard time.
But Maya's got targets to meet, you know?
We're lucky she bought us two weeks.
Mrs. Linda.
You haven't gone to the market?
It's so quiet, like a failed project.
I'll have the usual.
Mrs. Surti!
You've gone shopping.
You didn't ask me.
Sorry, Linda.
This online service is fresher,
it's directly from the supplier.
The others are ordering there too.
Excuse me, I'm in a rush to cook.
Okay.
@TITIP_DONG
PRACTICAL AND EASY
At this point, you might as well resign.
You've been there for years
and they still don't appreciate you?
To be honest,
I'm at a loss, Bram.
Should I accept the cut or resign?
You should leave.
The company is going under.
People are getting laid off,
they're selling everything
in the warehouse,
even the meeting room AC
was replaced with a cheap fan.
Why are you so afraid to resign?
Look at me, ever since I quit,
I've been so much happier at work.
Life's not stressful,
and my face is glowing.
Are you going to keep rotting like this?
For Jessica?
That's me.
Mr. Tony, if you decide to resign,
you should let me know.
I have another motorcycle at home,
you can borrow it to use as a bike-taxi
while looking for a new job.
Okay? See you later.
Ride safe.
-That's mine.
-Here you go, sir.
-Thanks.
-You're welcome.
Look, you can try other stores.
They won't offer a price that low.
I know. I've been to 20 other shops.
Fine, make it five days.
AGUNG PRINTING
WE PRINT EVERYTHING
Sure, but pay me upfront.
Huh?
What? It's usually half price.
We've just started the business,
the store is brand-new.
So we're low on production funds.
That's why we're offering
such a low price.
Opening promo.
All right, I'll bring the money tomorrow.
But I want daily progress updates.
-Got it?
-Sure thing. We got it.
Also, use this material for my order.
That should cut the price in half, right?
What do you mean, Maya?
Linda, my boss told me to.
I don't have any say.
I can't cover for anyone.
What about your promise by next week?
Are you interested in renting this house?
Yeah, that was the plan.
But it seems like
a lot of work to renovate.
Listen, Lin. Just get the money ready.
I'll try to find him another place.
Hopefully he'll like that one better.
I've lived here for 15 years.
My children were all born here.
The neighborhood is nice,
and there's a top school nearby.
Right…
The neighbors are caring.
This house means a lot to my family.
I see…
So if you have any doubts
and believe there's still a lot
to repair in this house,
my advice would be not to take it.
Because I'll return to this house.
Excuse us.
FOR RENT
At the moment,
we've used half of the grocery money
for Grandpa Hanz's travel costs.
Until Dad's salary arrives,
we'll make do with the remaining funds.
Honey.
I think we're out of time. Five days left.
Should I take on a side job?
Is that okay?
It's useless. We won't make it in time.
Actually, I have an idea that might work.
But…
I'm not sure about it.
Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
Sal.
Our moving plans
might have to be called off.
Dad only got half of his bonus,
so we plan to
borrow your savings. Is that okay?
I'm sorry, Mom.
This is all I have right now.
What is this?
FOR RENT
-Mister.
-Yes?
Has this shop moved or shut down?
Gosh, they're scammers, miss.
A lot of people have been
looking for him since yesterday.
Don't fall for cheap prices.
Well, excuse me.
I'm sorry it came to this.
It's okay, Sally.
You can keep the money for now.
No. It's not mine to keep.
Oh, my God, Sally.
Why didn't you tell me?
I can't believe it!
Why should I tell you?
To make you feel worse?
Why do you think I do this?
Because you all told me
to put in effort and live frugally.
You should be the ones
looking out for my best interests.
I shouldn't be worrying about money.
Sally, I know you're upset.
But you shouldn't say that to your dad.
I understand
you've always taught us
to value money,
but this is tough.
I've tried, been careful,
worked hard, but I still failed.
It's okay.
I envy you, Mom.
You're always the one stepping up
to deal with problems in our family.
I tried…
I tried to be like you,
but I couldn't.
I'm ashamed of myself.
Sally.
I'm strong because of all of you.
Because of you.
Easy.
I'm sorry that
I haven't been able to give you the best.
But luck
follows hard work.
If we tried but still failed,
it's just not our time yet.
Failure doesn't mean defeat.
You only lose when you stop trying.
I'm sorry, Dad.
I didn't mean to say that.
You've given your best for all of us.
I do apologize.
All right.
Sir.
Thank you.
-Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
The rest of my bonus.
It's paid in full.
Thank God.
Let's count it.
We're
still short 18 million.
Use the emergency funds.
What funds?
There's nothing.
Moving is pointless
if we can't afford food.
The investment.
What?
We still have investments?
Kids. Mom wants to tell you something.
JAKARTA PANDEMONIUM
OCTOBER 2021
The coronavirus
has affected not only health,
but also weakened the economy.
People at work are saying if things don't
change for the next two or three years,
we might face another financial crisis.
Let's hope not. Seriously?
I'm serious.
So they put all their savings into crypto.
Remember how impossible it was to get
money out of the bank during the crisis?
Do you remember?
You can cash out crypto whenever,
and it's simple.
That's why it's booming right now.
Is it safe?
It must be risky.
But if we invest for a short time,
it's safe.
Okay.
Let's do it.
But let's stick to the plan.
Once the investment goes up, we cash out.
Don't stay too long, don't be greedy.
Aye, aye.
If it works out,
the profit isn't just for us,
but for our children too.
-Right?
-Let's see.
BITCOIN TANKED
Bitcoin's value has been under scrutiny
after its price kept falling.
Over the past 24 hours,
it has dropped over 10%.
This trend is expected to continue.
BITCOIN FALLS
Honey, is this a joke?
We're down to 20 million
from 80 million!
I don't get it either, Lin.
Everyone at the office is freaking out,
many are selling at a loss.
And we're not selling?
What if it drops even more?
I was going to do that,
but they said not to panic,
just hold.
It should go up again
in two to three weeks.
Is that possible?
Yeah.
They said this kind of thing
happens all the time.
What do you think?
I don't care about profits anymore,
I just…
want to recover our savings.
I trust you, honey.
But if you get this wrong…
we're doomed.
You never said anything about this.
And now that's all the money left?
So what was the point of me
being used as child labor,
being underfed,
and nearly dropping out of school?
That amount could've sent me
to college abroad.
I'm not sure about that.
Not because of the money,
but because of your brain capacity.
Unless by "abroad" you mean
some remote village in Cambodia.
Billy's right.
After being so frugal,
we're getting poorer instead of richer.
Don't say that, Sally.
This has nothing to do with frugal living.
Let's just accept this as bad luck.
I promise to return your college savings.
But before that, I want to apologize.
Would it be okay
if I used the rest of the money
for something very important?
I told you before, Dad.
I can pursue college in other ways.
It's a tough decision.
I guess I have to
make sacrifices for this family.
Besides, college isn't
a guarantee of success.
How can I say this, Billy?
Thank you so much for your sacrifice.
But no matter what,
you have to go to college. Got it?
Yeah.
College is important.
Don't even try.
Lin.
Maya. As I promised.
For a full year.
I… don't know how to tell you.
Lin.
I'm really sorry.
The house has been taken by someone.
No. You promised me.
I brought the money as promised.
My boss handled the deal.
This person is paying more.
After you came with me
to see the house the other day,
he suddenly changed his mind.
He said the neighborhood is nice
and the neighbors are caring.
I didn't know what to do.
I'm sorry, Linda.
I think I know who said that.
Hey…
Honey.
How did it go?
Oh, no.
Someone was willing to pay more rent
because the neighborhood is nice,
the neighbors are caring.
And there's a top school nearby.
That's it, then. Game over.
We were so close.
You took those pictures?
Considering my intellectual capacity,
I should be the one
shaping historical moments,
not just capturing them.
This is all my fault.
Hey.
Don't say that, honey.
This is my fault.
Being the head of the family,
it's my duty to work and earn a living.
-My responsibility.
-No, honey.
Yes, it's your duty,
but that's not the problem.
We should've started a mortgage
to buy that house at the beginning.
Why didn't you?
Exactly.
Back then, I didn't see
the point of buying a house.
Renting was convenient, it was affordable.
And the extra cash could go toward
living costs, savings…
And crypto investments.
Sorry.
The main thing was convenience.
I got so caught up in it
that I didn't plan ahead.
And look at us now.
Living here.
Don't dwell on it.
What's done is done.
There's no need to fear or worry.
No matter what, we're still a family.
We're here now,
in this house.
The main thing is "us."
That's clever, Kenny.
You kids are amazing.
So what if we live here
for the time being?
We have the money to renovate it, right?
-Exactly.
-Okay.
In that case…
We'll stay in this house.
This is bad.
What is?
Rozak told me Haji Jaul is signing
the lease tonight. That's soon.
Does anyone know Engkong's house?
I know.
But I don't remember the way.
Oh, man…
Come on. I know every alley around here.
-Okay.
-Great. Let's find Engkong.
Let's get going.
From here, we go to the badminton court.
Straight and turn right.
-From here, find the power post.
-Turn right at the crossroads.
It gets tricky here.
I don't remember the exact spot,
but there was a smell of cat poop.
Mrs. Romlah has a lot of cats.
Go straight and turn left.
It's true.
Here!
-This is it? This is Engkong's house?
-Yes. Yes, Mom. Look.
Engkong!
-So quiet.
-Billy! Watch out.
Billy!
-What are you doing?
-Rozak.
I want to see Engkong.
You're off. That's not his house.
It's over there.
But…
That's Ali's house.
The guy that passed away?
Yeah.
Who played ping-pong?
Yeah, the one that died in that--
Okay, thanks.
-Come on.
-Let's go.
Sign there.
Engkong.
Take off your sandals. Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
Hi.
-Everyone, say hi.
-The entire family?
-Engkong.
-Yes, hello.
-Peace be upon you.
-And upon you peace.
Listen, Engkong.
I…
-We--
-Spit it out!
Don't waste my time. Hurry up.
I'm doing business with Jaul.
We want to extend the lease.
Are you serious?
You said the place was in bad shape
and you accused me of chasing profit.
Yes, I admit I was wrong.
I was exhausted at the time,
and the roof collapse was such a shock.
Thankfully, no one got hurt.
Still, as bad as that house was,
that house gave us a second chance.
We decided together to fix up the house.
Not for your profit,
but for ourselves.
I swear.
I'm sorry, Engkong.
I forgive you.
But I handed over the lease to Jaul.
Now what?
It's better to let
a family in need live there.
It keeps us in their prayers.
Thank God.
Now, listen to me.
Go ahead and renovate the house.
But make sure
you thank Jaul.
Jaul.
You okay with it?
Yes, ma'am. You can have it.
Thank you so much.
Say thanks, everyone.
Thank you, Haji Jaul.
Thank you.
Yes…
We were so close to being homeless.
-Thank God.
-Right.
We pulled through.
-Steady, Billy.
-Watch the stairs.
Need a hand?
I can do it.
You don't need my help?
Turn around.
You resigned?
You think I'll get upset? Nope.
I'm fine.
We can do light renovations,
make this place feel more like home
while you look for a new job.
It's a tight fit.
Yeah, it's a bit tight.
Oh, no.
Thank God it didn't snap.
Our own home
Sis.
What happened to you?
I didn't take the civil servant test.
I didn't feel like it.
Mom got upset and told me
I should leave and never come back.
So I ran away.
She always gets upset for no reason.
Who wouldn't?
I'd be upset too!
Cipto,
Mom worked hard
to network and talk to people
for you to take that test.
You know I can only work according
to my passion.
Being a civil servant is not it.
Passion shmassion.
What even is your passion?
You took a machinery course,
then you got bored.
Then you said, "Mom, my friend
works in Bangkok. It sounds fun."
It is fun.
Really? Mom even sold her land for that.
No need to bring up the past.
I just need help,
I don't have anyone else.
Have you eaten?
No.
But you do eat, right?
Yeah.
Go ahead and lie down.
Your sister and I will talk.
We'll discuss this again.
I don't want to be a freeloader.
If I can, I'll help with anything.
Good.
No way.
No.
Give it a shot.
Remind him, he must work and contribute.
We can make it work.
-He's your little brother. Poor guy.
-Honey.
Yes, thank you.
But look, you're committed,
with real experience and qualifications.
Yet you have a hard time finding a job.
What about him?
WELCOME
TO OUR GUESTS
CONGRATULATIONS & GOOD LUCK
ON THE OPENING OF HEPI MART
Welcome to Hepi Mart,
always happy, always smart!
How can I help you?
Maybe later.
Can I look around first?
Yes, ma'am.
You don't have any promos or discounts?
Normally yes, at the start of the month.
To attract more people
doing monthly shopping.
Then, I'll buy later when it's discounted.
Isn't that right?
BUSINESS AND PROPERTY
You're back to shop?
Mom!
I left my kid.
Please pay for the magazine.
Kenny… That's enough, Ken.
No!
Ma'am, please pay.
He opened it.
Now I have to read it.
Boom. Pass!
-Shoot!
-Goal!
What?
What are you doing there?
When did you get in?
Let me cool off.
Cool off? You think this is the mountains?
-Get out!
-Give me just ten minutes.
Get out! I don't care. Don't come back
if you're not here to shop.
My armpits are still wet.
I don't care.
Ask your mom for money
then come back here to shop.
The total is Rp19,850.
I'll give you candy for the change.
So I can pay with candy too?
Please wait.
Wait.
No head.
No bones.
Thanks.
Sorry for the wait. Here you go.
Where's the Rp50?
Rp50?
The change is Rp150.
This is just Rp100.
Do you mind donating it?
What donation?
For me. I got tired trying to find coins.
No way.
Please wait.
Here's the money.
-Thank you.
-You're welcome.
My turn.
-Careful.
-Thank you.
Sorry.
I went to every bank,
they don't even produce 50 rupiah anymore.
Then why did you put Rp50 in the price?
I have no idea either.
Here.
Here you go.
A discount.
Now it's Rp19,800.
I've been waiting since noon.
This is the best discount you can give?
Fine.
Here, just take it.
And take this too.
There you go.
Now it's a win-win solution.
Win-win solution?
You won and I got no solution!
Let's check if the money…
SAVINGS
Good afternoon, miss.
Please take a queue number.
ACCOUNT OPENING
AND PERSONAL DATA UPDATE FORM
Yes, this is Tony Sukaharta.
Tomorrow at 8:00?
Yes, I can do offline.
Yes, sir. Thank you.
An interview?
You got this.
Thank you.
Good luck, Dad.
Dad?
Sorry for not telling you sooner…
Sir. Where do you want to put the goat?
I'm moving in here.
BASED ON THE BIP GRAMEDIA
BESTSELLING COMIC "KELUARGA SUPER IRIT"